.Dd $Mdocdate: November 25 2020 $
.Dt RDATE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rdate
.Nd set the system's date from a remote host
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl 46acnpsuv
.Op Fl b Ar sec
.Op Fl o Ar port
.Op Fl t Ar sec
.Ar host
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
displays and sets the local date and time from the
host name or address given as the argument.
The time source may be an RFC 868 TCP protocol
server, which is usually implemented as a built-in
service of
.Xr inetd 8 ,
or an RFC 5905 protocol SNTP/NTP server.
By default,
.Nm
uses the RFC 868 TCP protocol.
.Pp
.Sy OpenRdate
supports IPv4 and IPv6 protocols.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl 4
Force
.Nm
to use IPv4 addresses only.
.It Fl 6
Force
.Nm
to use IPv6 addresses only.
.It Fl a
Use the
.Xr adjtime 2
call to gradually skew the local time to the remote
time rather than just hopping.
.It Fl b sec
Use
.Xr adjtime 2
if clock difference is at most
.Ar sec
seconds or hop if difference is greater.
This is the same as including of removing the option
.Fl a ,
based on clock difference.
.It Fl c
Correct leap seconds.
Sometimes required when synchronizing to an NTP server.
When synchronizing using the RFC 868 protocol, use this
option only if the server does not correctly account for leap
seconds.
You can determine if you need this parameter if you sync
against an NTP server (with this parameter) or (recommended)
check with a local radio controlled watch or phone service.
.It Fl n
Use SNTP (old RFC 2030, currently RFC 5905) instead of the
RFC 868 time protocol.
.It Fl o Ar port
Use
.Ar port
instead of port 37.
.It Fl p
Do not set, just print the remote time.
.It Fl s
Do not print the time.
.It Fl u
Use UDP instead of TCP as transport.
.It Fl t Ar msec
Does not set time if it took more than
.Ar msec
milliseconds to fetch time from network.
.It Fl v
Verbose output.
Always show the adjustment.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/log/wtmp -compact
.It Pa /var/log/wtmp
Record of date resets and time changes.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
To get the legal time in Germany, set the
.Pa /etc/localtime
symlink to
.Pa /usr/share/zoneinfo/right/Europe/Berlin
and issue the following command:
.Bd -literal
    $ rdate -ncv ptbtime1.ptb.de
.Ed
.Pp
The command of course assumes you have a working internet
connection and DNS set up to connect to the server at
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt in Braunschweig, Germany.
.Pp
To gradually adjust time once an hour after the first
.Dq step
adjustment, put the following line into root's
.Xr crontab 5 :
.Bd -literal
    58  *  *  *  *  rdate -ncav ptbtime1.ptb.de | logger -t NTP
.Ed
.Pp
To set the time through an
.Xr ssh 1
tunnel, use something like so:
.Bd -literal
    $ ssh -f -L 10037:time.example.com:37 tyr.example.com sleep 10
    $ rdate -a -o 10037 localhost
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr date 1 ,
.Xr adjtime 2 ,
.Xr inetd 8 ,
.Xr ntpd 8 ,
.Xr ntpdate 8 ,
.Xr timed 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.Sy OpenRdate
was originally developed by
.An David Snyder
and was based in
.Nm ,
created by
.An Christos Zoulas
in 1994 for
.Ox .
Over time, OpenRdate got several contributions from people.
.Pp
This manual page was written by Christos Zoulas .
It was changed by Anibal Monsalve Salazar for the Debian
Project and updated by Joao Eriberto Mota Filho .
The manual page was updated to
.Xr mdoc 7
by Aisha Tammy .
